# What Andre Braugher can teach us about postmodern TV

Last night, I watched season six, episode thirteen of *Law & Order, *a show dear
to my heart. It was great. What made it especially great was that it was a
crossover with another show dear to my heart,* Homicide: Life On The Streets*,
and in particular it brought Frank Pembleton (Andre Braugher) from Baltimore to
NYC to team up with the NYPD.

If you like *Brooklyn Nine-Nine* and you haven’t watched *Homicide*, do:
Braugher’s performance is a complete joy. Pembleton’s whole deal is that he’s a
very charismatic guy, but Braugher’s own natural charisma overspills and goes
beyond Pempleton’s in a unique and very watchable way. He’s almost — but not —
too good.

The plot was about a white supremacist who bombed a subway coming from Harlem,
and whose modus operandi was notably similar to that of someone who had bombed a
black church in Baltimore five years earlier. An almost parodically evil lawyer
attempted to get the racist off, but an almost parodically good Jack McCoy won
out, delivering a stirring peroration about racism to the jury at the end. All
in all, a great 47 minutes of television.

But something puzzled me. This particular episode, which is highly
representative of the series as a whole, aired in February 1996. A couple of
weeks earlier you could have watched an episode of *Seinfeld* in which Jerry
stole, on the street, a loaf of bread from an old lady. And a couple of weeks
before that, you could have watched an episode of *The Simpsons* in which George
H.W. Bush moves in opposite the Simpsons and fights with Homer.

These sitcoms are cynical, nihilistic, and (in a sense to be explained)
postmodern. By contrast, *Law & Order* is none of those things. It’s a formulaic
procedural in which good tends to win out over evil, and the heroes are
employees of the state.

(I don’t mean ‘formulaic’ pejoratively: the ability of *Law & Order* in
particular to follow its formula is, to me, close to awe-inspiring: watch an
episode and you will see that not a single line of dialogue is irrelevant, not a
single scene overplays by even a second (by contrast, much so-called prestige TV
has exactly these faults). Any comparison would be pretentious and
silly-sounding, but it really is a feat of dramatic engineering.)

So here’s a question: what’s the deal with this difference between cynical,
playful, postmodern sitcoms and straight cop shows?

Here’s another way to ask that question: you might think that the sort of person
who enjoys *Seinfeld* and *The Simpsons* will be exactly the sort of person who
will not enjoy good vs evil police procedurals. Yet the US audience of the time,
presumably, liked both. What does that say about such audiences, about how we
relate to fictions, about how fictions reflect the values of the time?

I can’t answer all those big questions. But I will propose a theory that can
explain why sitcoms were postmodern while drama series were not. I will do so by
presenting a theory of cultural evolution. In particular, by looking at
subsequent sitcoms and cop shows, I’ll suggest this: since the millennium, cop
shows have become *more *postmodern while comedy shows have become *less* so. In
general, TV in the late twentieth century went from straight to postmodern and
thence to postpostmodern. The only difference is that for sitcoms, postmodernism
began in the mid-90s, roughly, while for the cop show it only kicked in around
the millennium. The two genres are following the same evolutionary path, they
just began at different times. Our story begins in 2018, with Braugher in
*Brooklyn Nine-Nine* as Captain Raymond Holt; it will end in the mid-90s with
Braugher as Pembleton in *Homicide*. Tracing comedy and drama in this
Braugherian way will give us our theory.

<span class="figcaption_hack">Having just heard a pun about a Hungarian cellist Holt is — as you can see —
cracking up.</span>

#### US Sitcoms Since The 90s: The Decline Of Postmodernism

Postmodernism is hard to define, but as I will use it in this essay it has the
following features: it involves (i) a mixing of high and low culture, (ii) a
playfulness about form and recognition of itself as fictive, (iii) a tendency
towards presenting a lot of factual information about the world, and (iv) a
mixing of the personal with events of social or world historical momentousness.
(It is thus markedly different from the postmodernism that people think portends
the decline of truth, objectivity, Western civilisation &c — we could call it
cultural postmodernism, to make the distinction.)

Thomas Pynchon’s *Gravity’s Rainbow* is paradigm (cultural) postmodernism: it’s
a story about the second world war where psychological and mathematical theories
appear alongside vaudeville and scatological humour (i), a story so meticulously
researched that you can acquire a lot of information about war-torn London
(about the German weaponry used on it, about what songs were playing on what
radio station on what day at what hour, about much else) from reading it (iii),
a story in which the fate of the allies is tied up with the erections of its
kind of sillyly named protagonist Tyrone Slothrop (i,iv). Other paradigm works
which exhibit postmodernism’s playfulness and awareness of itself as fictive
(i.e. (ii)) include Paul Auster’s *New York Trilogy* (with its protagonist
called Paul Auster), David Foster Wallace’s *The Pale King* (a central character
in which is called David Wallace), and John Barth’s *Lost In the Funhouse*,
which is a collection of short stories about what it is to be a short story.

With that in mind, consider *Brooklyn Nine-Nine *(which first aired in 2013).
Does it have any of these features? I suggest that the answer to this is no.
*Brooklyn Nine-Nine* is good simply because it’s a good sitcom. It relies on no
playfulness, it doesn’t concern itself much with grand socio-political events,
its tone is even, it doesn’t wink to the camera and break the fourth wall to let
the reader know that it is a sitcom. It wouldn’t — apart from the fact that
people of colour occupy most of its main roles and it’s otherwise much more
socially progressive — be out of place in the 1980s.

So what, you might think. Why expect TV sitcoms to be postmodern? Well, because
they were. To see this, rewind a bit.

What came before *Brooklyn*? Well, for one, the US version of *The Office*. Now
let’s again ask: does it have any postmodern features? Not really, apart from
one thing: it’s a mockumentary. This is a very important feature (a feature
shared by the in other respects similar *Parks And Rec*). The reason for this is
that it lets the writers break the fourth wall and thus the show can convey an
awareness of itself as a fiction (thus exhibiting the paradigm postmodern
feature (ii)) while giving us, in other respects a straight sitcom. It
essentially does this by cleverly bringing the fourth wall into the show, so it
can break it while still remaining in its own self-contained fictional universe.
It flirts with postmodernism, I think.

*The Office* is more postmodern than *Brooklyn*, anyway. The reason for this, I
suggest, is the following: in 2005 when the show started, a straight up sitcom
would have felt off to viewers. They were used — as we’ll see in a second — to
their comedy being more self-aware, more playful with form, and a straight up
portrayal of people working, living and loving at a paper office wouldn’t have
flown. The mockumentary format, I propose, was used to ween viewers away from
postmodernism.

To see this, consider what comes before *The Office*. *Arrested Development*
(beginning in 2003) is arguably the standout early post-millennium sitcom. And
with it we *are* in postmodern territory. It plays with form (ii). It has a
narrator who is not an impartial observer and recorder of events: he interjects
his own opinions, corrects people when they get his name wrong, and so on. It is
endlessly self-referential: many jokes (about chicken dancing, cornballers, Star
Wars reenacting) pop up again and again, referring back to themselves (what
fancy theorists would call inter-, or rather intra-, textuality). It has the
Pynchonian mixture of the personal and the political (iv), as when petty crook
George Bluth finds himself involved in the Iraq war. It is crammed with (albeit
fictional) information (iii), presented in a documentary format — websites, news
reports, adverts for old products, and so on. It even has silly Pynchonian names
(GOB, Maeby, etc.)!

If you weren’t convinced before, I hope you’re now coming round to the thought
that postmodernism has been a part of recent sitcoms.

What was before *Arrested Development*? Now we’re in the 90s, and we have *The
Simpsons* and *Seinfeld*. Playing with form (ii) is almost compulsive: from
*Seinfeld*’s show within a show about nothing to Bart whistling *The Simpsons*
theme while sliding down the banister. The personal and the political are
completely flattened in *The Simpsons*(iv): it’s only barely a coincidence that
within a month of the first airing of the episode of *L&O* I watched last night
an episode of *The Simpsons* aired the premise of which was that Homer squabbles
with a former president. And it blends high and low culture (i): it’s the sort
of show you literally need annotations for, but a lot of its humour is just:
Homer falls down or hurts himself. It has all the features of the postmodern, I
claim. Arguably, in fact, *The Simpsons* is the most postmodern work in any
medium there has yet been.

What’s the point of this reverse chronology? Well, played forward, this is what
it suggests: US sitcoms have gradually been depostmodernifying themselves. The
reason for this, plausibly, is just that *The Simpsons* did postmodernism so
well that people *had* to try something else, but at the same time they couldn’t
move away from the postmodern model too quickly because it would jar with
audiences. So, instead, we witnessed it gradually happen: gradually postmodern
features got taken out of the best sitcoms, and so today we watch Braugher as
Ray Holt helming a precinct which — diversity notwithstanding — wouldn’t be out
of place in pre-Simpsonian times. TV sitcoms have gone past the postmodern and
have looped back around: they are, let’s say, postpostmodern.

Now here’s a question: can we use this theory to explain the genre of the US cop
show? I will suggest that we can.

<span class="figcaption_hack">Braugher as Frank Pembleton</span>

#### Postmodernism Comes Late: Cop Shows

Let’s stick in the 90s, and let’s consider Braugher’s erstwhile role as
Detective Frank Pembleton. Actually, let’s not — it’s been a while since I
watched *Homicide*, whereas *Law & Order* is fresh in my mind. I think many of
the same things apply to each, however.

So, first, there is nothing at all postmodern about *Law & Order*. It’s
completely straight. It doesn’t recognise itself as a cop show — there’s no
playing with form. There’s no jarring mixture of tones, no blend of high and low
culture. There’s no interweaving of the personal and the political. There’s no
moral ambiguity: instead of the amoral nihilists like the Seinfeld gang, we have
a good old traditional morality play pitting good — the cops and attorneys — vs
bad, the criminals and their slippery lawyers.

Now, I have to confess I don’t know the answer to one very important question:
why, when *The Simpsons* was postmodern, was *Law &Order* straight? I suspect
that properly to answer that I would have to go back to 80s cop shows, but at
the time of writing I haven’t watched any of them, unfortunately.

But there’s still much interesting to say. Because the theory of sitcoms I
presented above, if it is to apply to cop shows, yields a prediction: if genres
move from straight to postmodern (from the caring Cosbys to the hateful
Seinfeldians, from — to ape famous words by Barbara Bush — the Waltons to The
Simpsons) and then to postpostmodern, then we should expect that the straight
period of cop shows be followed by a postmodern phase.

And that is exactly what we find! *The Wire *(which first aired in 2002),
arguably the successor of the procedural, I’ll now argue, is postmodern. This
might sound surprising: after all, is not the first word people reach for when
they speak of it ‘Dickensian’, with its implications of the straight up 19th
century social realist novel?

But actually, looking closely, we see many — though, I admit, not all — of the
hallmarks of postmodernism. Its central character is almost parodic of the genre
(ii): the drunk detective who **by god** gets results. Two of the other
detectives’ names are distinctly Pynchonian: Polk and Mahon (cf. the Anglified
Irish *pogue mahone*, kiss my ass). More importantly, it mixes seriousness with
slapstick (i): think of [the infamous ‘fuck — bullet’
scene](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XdfwFDZGnUk) (I trust that suffices to
describe it to fans), or the equally famous scene [where a drunk Bunk burns his
clothes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8yWp-Byg0Sc) to hide evidence of a
one-night stand without thinking about how he’ll get from the location of the
one-night stand to his home. It has far-fetched, almost comedic plots concerning
matters of great social importance, as when Major Colvin attempts to legalize
drugs in an area of Baltimore (iv-ish).

And, like Pynchon and Foster Wallace, it bombards us with facts (iii): with
police and projects slang whose meaning you just have to work out for yourself
and which combine to give its fictional world a sense of informational depth
typical of the postmodern.

I think that’s enough to make the case: *The Wire*, contrary to what you might
think, but in line with my theory of cultural evolution, is postmodern. The next
obvious question to ask is: what’s next? If my theory is to be right, we should
expect the 2010s to have given us postpostmodern cop shows.

Do they? Here I must confess some doubt. Consider *True Detective* season 1
(2014). On the one hand, it has none of the features characteristic of
postmodernism. It’s unrelentingly dark, with no slapstick. It doesn’t impart
worldly information. It doesn’t play with form. It doesn’t mix personal and
political. On the other hand, it has none of the features of straight series,
like the episodic morally certain cop shows of the 90s.

But this hypothesis doesn’t seem unreasonable: *True Detective*, somewhat like
*The Office*, is a transitional show. It’s neither postmodern but nor is it
straight. And that would make pretty good sense for my theory, timeline-wise:
given the transition to postmodernity in the cop show came a few years later
than it did for the sitcom, we should expect the transition to postpostmodernity
to come similarly later.

A good theory should make falsifiable predictions. And so I conclude with one
that the theory of cultural evolution I have presented here makes: in the 2020s
we will see the advent of postpostmodern cop shows, shows which are much more
similar to the classic morally univocal, tightly plotted shows of the 90s. Let’s
see how my prediction fares in a couple years time, but even before then I hope
I’ve done something to show you that culture obeys patterns — one might say laws
— that can be found if you look close enough.

