# *Review: “Chapo Guide To Revolution”*

*The Chapo Guide To Revolution: A Manifesto Against Facts, Logic, and Reason* is
the book written by four of the five hosts of the similarly named podcast which
is famous for making a lot of money and being emblematic of the ‘dirtbag’ left.

I recommend the book. It’s funny and smart, a sort of — in a way to be
substantiated later — cross of Chomsky and Zinn (thus a historico-political
account of the US with an accent on imperialism and discrimination) with Bill
Hicks and The Simpsons. It made me laugh out loud about ten times (which I would
say is a lot) and is very well-written. Other reviewers said that it would be a
good book to put in the books of an otherwise politically unmotivated young
person and — with some qualifications (while jokes about the Mont Pelerin
society and George McGovern are great if you know the history, if you don’t
they’ll go over your head) — I agree with that.

Their thesis is clear: capitalism doesn’t work for young people, American
history consists in a series of exploitations (of black people and women, of
foreign belligerents, of the environment); Democrats are spineless and weak and
Republicans powerful, but diabolically so, the media is mostly dumbasses, work
sucks, and prestige TV is bad.

I will first describe the contents of the book, and then assess the prospects of
the ‘fully ironic’ ideology they offer in response to this onslaught of
negativity.

**Overview Of The Book**

The book has chapters, more or less, for each sentence in the summary above. I
will concentrate on a couple, beginning with the chapter on liberals.

Chapo hate the libs, and to tell us why, they run us through the history and
proto-history of liberalism in America, as manifest in the Democratic Party and
its ideological forebears.

They hate them because liberals are weak (the text is peppered with words like
‘tepid’, ‘void’, ‘dainty’, ‘wimp out’). They are a class of people who, seeing
America jerked to the right by the, well, right, jerked right themselves, like a
puppy on a leash, to keep relevant.

This basic thought is of course a recognisable one, something manifest by, for
example, the use of ‘new’ (‘third way’) in the branding of the 90s liberal
parties on both sides of the Atlantic. Chapo’s sights go beyond the last 20–30
years, though. They present a pretty bleak, though funny and very readable,
account of a couple of hundred years of liberalism in America, from Puritans to
today.

Starting with today, they give us a taxonomy of the modern liberals you might
have met online. They tell us about the people who reply under Trump’s tweets
(who write things like “Hey Cheeto Benito, is this the fake news you’ve been
complaining about? #TheLiesAreComingFromInsideTheHouse”), or the many Twitter
people who get excited by celebrities (the superpowers of which are ‘Charisma,
remarkably low thetan levels’) who dunk on Trump at award shows, or again the
pro-war socially liberal liberals who read books like ‘The Balls To Be A Woman:
Golda Meir’s War against Toxic Masculinity’, who attend shows like ‘A Jazz
Tribute to Nato’, or again the people who things their children patently didn’t
say (“Doesn’t the pwesident know that the individual mandate shores up the
insuwance market?”). It’s funny.

To give a sense of the history they tell: taking up the story with FDR, for
example, their assessment of him is that the New Deal was (at least in part) an
operation to stave off more radical alternatives to capitalism the Depression
provoked and moreover one which excluded black people in order to get votes from
Southern Democratic politicians, and skipping to LBJ, we get a picture of him as
a racist warmonger, perhaps even one who waged war to keep capitalism alive via
Keynesian public works (in this case, funding the army). Skipping some more we
hear the familiar (and some new) complaints against Clinton — centrist, sexist,
state-gutting — and then Obama, the bank bailer out and War On Terror-continuer.

I have a few questions about this version of history they give us. Up front they
give us the picture of libs as jerked along by the increasingly uncontrollable
GOP, tied to procedure in an embarrassing way as the Republicans just
steamroller over them from enormity to enormity. But I’m not sure that that
one-size-fits-all theory can really capture all the data. Is it right to think
of FDR and LBJ as jerked rightwards? Maybe, but it’s not super obvious. If
liberals are all the same, how to explain their differences, as now their
enthusiasm for the state waxes (those just mentioned) and wanes (Clintons), and
as belligerence and social liberalism (attitudes to race, gender, etc.) changes
too?

Second, their extensive nihilism, although readable, makes one wonder what to
do. After all, presumably they will support things like Medicare for All and the
Green New Deal. But to the extent that they are still programs recognizably
within the liberal paradigm (Chomsky called Sanders a New Deal democrat) one
might come away thinking that these are programs doomed to fail, at best
sticking plasters on the mortally wounded body of capitalism. So, and in a way
I’ll expand on later, I’m not sure their relentlessly caustic recap, if
accurate, is helpful.

Third, there is a completely different way of viewing the history, one suggested
by a book which coincidentally I read just before this one. In *Why Liberals Win
(Even When They Lose Elections)*, Stephen Prothero argues that there is pattern
to the various cultural wars liberals and conservatives engage in, according to
which they fight for a while (about the place of religious minorities in
America, about prohibition, about gay rights) and then liberals win and their
position becomes mainstream, and so one is tempted, looking back, to not see
liberals as effectual because what they effected is now taken for granted. On
this alternative reading of history, liberals aren’t the puny figures Chapo
gives us (I think their response would be to say that anything good in
liberalism is cribbed from echt-Left people, but who cares where an idea comes
from if it’s good? Also I don’t know if it’s right — think of classical liberal
John Stuart Mill on woman’s rights.)

The book then goes on to neoliberalism and conservatism. Neoliberalism, they
tell us, is the ideology which originated at a meeting in ‘Colorado’s historic
Overlook hotel in 1947’, a pretty perfect mashup of
[this](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mont_Pelerin_Society#History) and
[this](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Shining_(film)), a meeting which laid
the groundwork for neoliberalism ‘as well as a renewed spiritual interest in
certain long-forgotten Babylonian deities’ and which aimed ‘to craft policies
designed to nourish the vast and ancient elder gods they worshipped’. The
chapter ends, fittingly, in Lovecraftian babbling.

(An aside: I’ve been for a long time curious about the hyperbole one reads among
the political left, and especially its resort to such Lovecraftian hyperbole or
obscene scatology. Why is that the way we talk about our opponents today? But I
think this book suggested an answer to me: we’ve already wasted most of our
invective on liberals, and so, if we want to make room in insult-space for
conservatives, we need to resort to this sort of extreme imagery and verbiage.)

Their take on conversatives is that, unlike liberals who have a void at their
core, the Republicans know what they want and what they want is bad. It’s
basically a movement by a rich aristocracy to stay rich, and the cultural
trappings — family, hierarchy, country, heterosexuality — are means to that end:
‘Conservatives run on gays, guns, and God as they dismantle the public sector
and facilitate the upward transfer of wealth once they get into office’. The
section on conservatives throughout history is titled ‘We’re openly, 100 percent
Evil’.

Among the portraits of the contemporary right, I particularly liked Citizen Kek
(twitter handle: ‘HemorrhoidalSaxon’) their theory of whom is that he is the
sort of dispossessed young person who in days of yore would have been sent to
the colonies to brutalize others but now, colonies lacking, is forced to take
his misfitting adolescent aggression online and frequent r/TheDonald, and
TradCath weirdo, ‘a lot of tweed jackets, pipes, and upsetting facial hair with
none of the good humor or charm that usually accompanies them’

The rest of the book consists in a chapter on the media (early twentieth century
headlines from which include ‘Spanish Flu or Spanish Boo-Hoo? New Influenza
Nothing to Worry About’, and they give us an account of how journalists Dustin
Hoffman and Robert Redford sensationally broke Watergate) which, in addition to
many good jokes, provided at least this reader with some interesting information
about the early millennium political blogosphere I didn’t know about and some
good making fun of people who should be made fun of, and a chapter on culture,
which picks off some low hanging fruit (people who analogize politics to Harry
Potter and Game Of Thrones) and has some funny recaps of the Matrix.

**Is Ironic Politics Good?**

The stated aim of the book is to provide a “fully ironic” ideology. I want to
talk about this some, moving away from exposition of the book to consider the
broader idea of where such ideas come from and what, if anything, we should do
with them.

The first thing I want to note is that the book is, in a sense, fundamentally
not new. It forms part of a tradition of American satire in the US that now goes
back (at least) 30 years. That tradition is marked by irony, and I want to
suggest that irony-laced politics is, perhaps, not the best approach for those
of us who want things to change.

The basic thought is easy, and I’ve already kind of touched on it: everything,
pretty much, is bad for the Chapo gang. Fair enough: things do seem pretty bad.
But I think their ironic position compels them towards that judgement such that
even were things good they wouldn’t have the register to express it. The ironist
is compelled to judge everything negatively, to find ways to disparage things.
This most often is accompanied by humour, but need not be. They can tell us,
concerning climate change and having listed some disasters in the global south,
‘The apocalypse is already here; you just don’t live there yet’. There’s no joke
here. And they can tell us bad things along with the joke. One thing that their
position barely allows for is to say good things without a joke. The manifesto
with which the book begins seems to typify this:

> 1. Three-day workweek, four-hour workday

> 2. Health care, childcare, education, housing, and food are free and paid for by
> turning all existing billionaires into thousandaires and/or Soylent

> 3. The use of logic, facts, and reason is outlawed

> 4. Feelings become fiat currency

> [etc]

They have with a couple of good and socialistically venerable ideas, but they
puncture it somewhat with hyperbole and then other ridiculous items. It’s as if
there’s a fear of sincerity that forces them to resort to bathos so as not to
seem uncool.

Arguably that’s bad. If one’s public voice is one that feels compelled to shit
over everything, what about one’s private voice, one’s thoughts? They might go
the same way. But that’s to constrain your thoughts, to dissuade you from the
process of thinking about and getting involved in alternatives because, if
everything is bad, then so must this new alternative you’re thinking about be.

(This anti-irony line of thought is not remotely original to me — it’s found in
David Foster Wallace’s early 90s essay ‘E Unibus Pluram’, for example.)

A prediction of this take would be that ironic politics would be in a sort of
stasis. It couldn’t progress, because it can’t even really think about progress
without instantly ironically distancing itself from it.

And this, I think, is born out. We’re now about three decades deep in ironic
politics, and those decades have seen very limited sketching of alternatives.
Thus let’s rewind some thirty years to the first Gulf war. The Gen X equivalent
to the Chapo listener might well have gone to see Bill Hicks perform, and heard
routines like this:

> See, everyone got boners over the technology, and it was pretty incredible.
> Watching missiles fly down air vents, pretty unbelievable. But couldn’t we
feasibly use that same technology to shoot food at hungry people? Know what I
mean? Fly over Ethiopia, “There’s a guy that needs a banana!” BOOM! The Stealth
Banana. Smart fruit! I don’t know. Once again, I was watching the f’ing news,
and it really threw me off. It depressed everyone, it’s so scary watching the
news, how they built it all out of proportion, like Iraq was ever, or could ever
possibly, under any stretch of the imagination be a threat to us-wwwwhatsoever.

In another routine, he says he saw on the news

> there’s a quote from Saddam Hussein going we have nothing against America we
> just want to see George Bush beheaded and his head kicked down the road like a
soccer ball I’m thinking that’s what I want to see.

Now compare the dedication to the Chapo Book (‘to the brave Mujahideen fighters
of Afghanistant’), or again consider this passage with, like the Hicks one,
mixes dick jokes and America bellicosity:

> Endless and aimless struggle against evil is … a great way to keep military
> budgets and their pleated trousers swole. The War on terror is the bathtub our
empire lies in, surveying a sunset over a wheat field in the Cialis commerical
that is our twenty-first-century international statecraft

We get, I think, the same disgust, the same detachment, the same sense that the
only appropriate response is scatological. But that reaction is limited. Those
listening to Bill Hicks are now 50 or 60, perhaps the very same libs the book
criticises, and I think a genuine concern is that Chapo listeners might go the
same way. Maybe this sort of comedy, by excluding everything, doesn’t open
vistas of possibility for its readers.

I could press this point. One of the reasons I found the book so enjoyable is
because it reminded me of The Simpsons in its capacity to look over and be funny
about American history.

(One could imagine the early twentieth century headline I quoted above spinning
on screen; in the episode Bart Gets An Elephant, signs at the Republican meeting
read *“We want what’s worst for everyone”* and *“We’re just plain evil.” *while*
*signs at the Democratic Party meeting: *“We hate life and ourselves”* and *“We
can’t govern!”. *Isn’t this pretty much Chapo’s thesis, expressed as they would
express it?”).

But one not great things about the Simpsons is its both sidesism: it is a show
that frequently counsels against political action and extremism, and arguably it
does so because of the ironic distance it takes towards the political sphere:
again, if everything is bad, then nothing is good. And again, it’s at least
unclear if The Simpsons generation are going to turn out to be the political
actors we need.

So that’s my tentative assessment: the ironic politics, although funny and hard
to resist, occludes possibilities, as evidence for which I point out that it’s
been around for a while during periods of political stagnation.

**''**
That somewhat negative assessment notwithstanding, I would still recommend and put this book into the hands of people interested in politics, comedy, or both, but I would do with a recommendation to actually spend some time thinking about what the future that follows the bleak history Chapo gives us might look like.
