# Is Civilization Furthered By Social Injustice?

> No doubt [Locke] was impressed, as all the men of his time were, by the gains to
> civilization that were due to rich men, chiefly as patrons of art and letters.
The same attitude exists in modern America, where science and art are largely
dependent upon the benefactions of the very rich. To some extent, civilization
is furthered by social injustice.

> Bertrand Russell, *A History Of Western Philosophy*

This post is about a tension between the ethics and the economics of attention —
between how we *should* direct our attention and *the ways in which it is
economically viable* to do so. The basic thought is that attention should be
distributed much more equally, but that this is impossible. Culture,
depressingly and (to me at least) surprisingly, depends on attentional
inequality.

*****

Culture costs. I take it that that’s what underlies Russell’s quotation: arts
and letters, back in the day, worked because some people had enough money not
only to cover their living expenses and those of their family and land, but also
to be able to give money away so that others less well off could spend their
time on culture rather than earning money to buy food. That is, culture depends
on there being some who possess a lot of money, but since typically people have
a lot of money at the expensive of others who have little, culture depends on
inequality.

It’s plausible to think that this goes deep. Maybe something like this bit of
historical reasoning is so: at a certain point several thousand years ago, we
finally learned how to produce a surplus of food, which is to say more food than
is required by society to subsist. We then decided to give that surplus to some
lucky few, who, instead of working to subsist (like most were forced to), were
able to produce cultural products — plays, poems, history, philosophy.

If this is so, again we have inequality as a precondition of culture, although
in this case it’s something like inequality of leisure time, or time to create,
or working time.

*****

Arguably today the central cultural inequality is attentional inequality, and
the central in demand quantity is attention. Note that because we are so much
richer, lives in culture are now possibilities for many more of us than at any
time in the past; moreover, in most cases, cultural jobs don’t pay enough for a
living. From these two facts it follows that, for the most part, if you’re
active in many cultural industries today, it’s not primarily because you’re out
to make money. Partly it’s because you have the skills — lots of education, some
spare time, etc. But mainly, I think, it’s because you want attention.

Looking at the cultural world in this way, we can immediately see that
attentional inequality is rife. The vast majority of attention goes to a small
number of artists/journalists/academics. The vast majority of
artists/journalists/academics get a very small quantity of information. Now
here’s a question: is attentional inequality a good or a bad thing?

*****

There’s a good case to be made that it’s a bad thing. Here are several reasons
for thinking this: for one, attentional inequality makes for a lack of
diversity. We hear the same voices again and again and others never (to see this
just open a newspaper, browse a bookstore, open up twitter, etc.) Arguably a
plurality of perspectives is inherently a good thing: we should seek to see the
world, whether we are artists, journalists, or academics, from as many
perspectives as possible. That is, attentional inequality might be inherently
culturally bad.

But there’s more. When faced with inequality, we should ask ourselves of its
source. Some inequality is tolerable: it’s fine that Eliud Kipchoge wins more
races than me, because he’s a better athlete. But some inequality is bad, owing
not to merit but to oppressive or unfair societal forces. Attentional inequality
is plausibly mainly of the latter sort. While undoubtedly some of it it
merit-based, a lot of it is based on where you studied, or who you know, who
publishes you, and so on. These are not good grounds for inequality, and so
attentional inequality seems like it’s bad not only as being productive of less
diversity, but also because where there’s inequality, there’s oppression, and
oppression is bad.

Finally, some inequality is unfair. In particular, it’s arguable that inequality
that is based on historical facts rather than current performance is unfair.
It’s for that reason that it rankles with us that the rich are rich in part
because they, or their parents, were rich. Being born rich means you have to
really screw up not to stay rich; being born poor means you really have to do
very well to not stay poor. Similarly, your novel will get attention if previous
novels of you or your publisher did; your academic articles will get attention
based on where you went to grad school; even the number of people your social
media post will be seen by is determined not by how good it is, but by how many
followers you already had.

There’s probably more to be said, but these reasons suggest to me that
attentional inequality is something we should seek, if at all possible, to fix.
(Indeed, in various posts on this blog, I have argued we should try to fix it;
this post is arguing against myself.)

This suggests its own question: can we fix attentional inequality? The main and
negative aim of this post is to suggest that we can’t.

*****

It will help to make this point if we consider a simplistic model of how
cultural production might have arisen millennia ago. Imagine there is a society
which up to now had been subsistence-based: each person had to work most of
their time in order to provide food to feed themselves. At a certain point,
thanks to innovation or luck, they start to produce a surplus. They decide to
invest that surplus in the creation of cultural goods — they will give the
surplus to someone who can write poems, stories, models of government, etc.
instead of working.

But there are several possible people who could play that role. Consider these
two possibilities:

**Equal**. They divide the surplus between everyone who could play that role.
Each person gets a half an hour off work each day to produce cultural things.

**Unequal.** They pick one person at random and give the surplus to them; that
person spends the whole day on cultural products.

Now, **Equal** seems clearly better, in a sense — it will produce a greater
number of perspectives, which is a good thing, and seems fairer. But — and
here’s the main point — it’s an unworkable model.

The problem is basically that the extra 30 mins a day that it gives to a bunch
of people, although egalitarian, is just not enough for sustained creative work.
Arguably, that extra time would be wasted, and the group would get no cultural
products.

On the other hand **Unequal**, although unfair, seems better: even if the work
the one person choosen produces is not to everyone’s tastes, and even if they
only got the gig because they’re friends with the king, nevertheless there’s a
good chance at least some cultural stuff will be produced on this model. By
concentrating the surplus on one person, we have a better chance of furthering
culture. Culture, in this model, depends on inequality.


*****

Again, we can translate this into a contemporary idiom easily enough. The
inequality we would seek to minimize would be attentional inequality, such that
the total of attention no longer gets overwhelmingly lavished on a select few,
but is more evenly spread across many more works or people.

But there’s a problem with this. None of this attentional redistribution,
plausibly, will make cultural work *easier* to do. It will still take months to
write a novel, for example. The reason people do these things is because they
want to get a decent chunk of attention — one proportional to the amount of
attention they expended producing the cultural work in question.

What that suggests to me is that if we each got a piece, but, of necessity, a
small piece, of the attentional pie, the incentives many people have for
producing things would go. People would, contemplating spending six months
writing a novel only for it to receive their small share of the total attention,
probably be reticent and do something else.

And this would hold generally: no one would have reason to produce cultural
things, and so plausibly cultural things would cease to be created. We wanted to
more fairly distribute attention among cultural products, but we ended up
causing such products to no longer exist!

Attentional equality, it seems, is not desirable, even though attentional
inequality isn’t, either.

*****

I want to end with two interesting consequences of seeing things in this way.
Think again about the subsistence/surplus parallel with which I began. Here’s a
way to translate that into a modern idiom: what we have today is a surplus of
attention, rather than food, and our question as a society is how to distribute
it.

But now here’s a thought: if the surplus of food, by being directed to a lucky
few, produced civilization, what might the surplus of attention produce, were it
similarly directed towards one well-defined goal? Could we develop a super
civilization with the surplus attention modern life gives to each of us? If you
think the answer to that question might be yes, then you might think that’s an
argument not for attention equality, nor even for maintaining the unequal status
quo, but for going for more injustice. Direct all our surplus attention towards
a select few rightly chosen people and hope that they will repay that attention
by creating new super cultural products. I’m not saying I buy this argument, but
it’s intriguing.

Secondly, and finally, thinking about things in this way can make one — at
least, did make me — think about the role of art in a different way. I like the
idea that art is a profound and important part of our lives, and in particular
that art is about the connection of two minds. Consider this quote from David
Foster Wallace:

> There’s a kind of *Ah-ha! Somebody at least for a moment feels about something
> or sees something the way that I do*. It doesn’t happen all the time. It’s these
brief flashes or flames, but I get that sometimes. I feel unalone —
intellectually, emotionally, spiritually. I feel human and unalone and that I’m
in a deep, significant conversation with another consciousness in fiction and
poetry in a way that I don’t with other art.

Faced with that, you might think that for each of us, there is a soul-artist,
and the goal of art should be to put one in contact with one’s soul artist: with
the person who sees the world as you see it but who can articulate what they see
better. Art would be about finding special connections; like dating.

Another perspective though is that art is like lawnmowers. There are no soul
lawnmowers. There are a range of mass-produced ones, and good lawnmower
behaviour is finding the one that has the best range of qualities for your
particular needs, even if it isn’t in any way tailored to you. The economic
thought I have suggested here leads to the second thought: if it’s necessary
that art, to get created, receive a large amount of attention, then it must
appeal to a large number of people, and so not just you, and so looking in art
for these special transcendent mind-to-mind connections is, perhaps, not what
you should be doing. Rather, you should bear in mind you’re dealing with
something mass produced as a condition of its existence. This is, I think, a
very unromantic picture of art but one I think that this way of seeing things
forces upon us.
