# Conceptual Engineering: A New Approach To Philosophy

Typically philosophy is conceived of as answering the big questions, and the big
questions are questions about how reality *is*. This goes back to Plato: in his
early dialogues he is concerned with what is called the *ti esti* question
(*ti*=what, *esti*=is it, in Greek). Socrates in those dialogues asked what is
knowledge, what is truth, what is justice, and so on (actually, he didn’t ask
precisely these questions, but let’s pretend he did because I want to use them
as examples below).

In recent years, some philosophers have started wondering whether the big
questions of philosophy are questions about how reality is. Instead, they’ve
suggested that instead of asking how reality *is*, the better question to ask is
how reality *should* *be*. What should knowledge, truth, and so on, be?

Here’s one way to look at that question. Our word ‘knowledge’ picks out certain
aspects of the world: certain states of mind, let’s say (that knowledge is a
state of mind is controversial, but it doesn’t matter).

And that ‘knowledge’ (or ‘truth’, or ‘justice’, or whatever) picks out what it
does pick out is important. If someone tells you they know something, that
matters. If they tell you, for example, that they know the bank will be open on
Saturday, so you can withdraw money then, that will affect your behaviour,
perhaps substantially. If it’s Friday night and you’re wondering if you need to
go out and get some cash before the weekend, and you hear that, you’ll relax,
get into your pajamas, watch some Netflix.

This is not meant to be a sophisticated point: we rely on words massively to
understand and to navigate the world, and to coordinate with each other. What
words we have, and what they mean, is important.

We can see this by imagining languages which are, to use to technical term that
linguistics and formal semanticists prefer, sucky. Thus imagine a language
which, instead of our ‘hunger’ and ‘thirst’, had just the word ‘thunger’, which
applied to somebody if they were either hungry or thirsty.

That would be really annoying. If your kid told you they were thungry, you
wouldn’t know whether to bring it juice or a sandwich.

And we can see the opposite point by attending to languages that are — again,
using the formal academic terminology — amazeballs. Thus imagine a language that
contained, in addition to ‘thirsty’, ‘thirstsweet’, which applied to somebody if
they were thirsty for in particular a sweet thing, and ‘thirstea’ which applied
to someone if they were thirsty for tea.

That might — only might, this is just for the sake of a colourful example — lead
to a better language. A language that would enable us to make better
distinctions, to describe the world and interact with it better. This would
never happen: you would never, on learning someone was thirsty and bringing them
a glass of water, be told ‘nah, I wanted juice[/tea]’. That would save time.

Such reflections lead us to a version of what Herman Cappelen calls the master
argument for conceptual engineering. Consider the language you speak. It’s not
maximally amazeballs: it would be absurd to think that English or any other
language makes all and only the right and most helpful distinctions that a
language could make. English could be improved. If English could be improved, we
should improve it.

But English contains words standing for philosophical concepts, and there’s no
reason to think that those particular words are maximally amazeballs either.
Kevin Scharp, for example, and maybe a bit roughly, argues that the concept of
truth is kind of like the concept of thunger: it’s not very useful. This is
manifest, in part, by its being subject to paradoxes such as the liar paradox
(‘This sentence is not true’ — is it true or false?) Scharp thinks we should
split the concept of truth up into two different concepts, kind of like we split
‘thirst’ up into ‘thirstweet’ and ‘thirstea’ (and of course we could introduce
other words to cover the whole range of thirst) in our imagined amazeballs
language.

And he does so, roughly, for the same reason: if philosophical English could be
improved, we should improve it. This, I take it, is the conceptual engineering
project. Find out which concepts or words are deficient and propose replacements
for them.

*****

Before considering some objections to this argument, I want to emphasize reasons
for thinking that these sorts of considerations are important. What words we
have matters immensely. Until very recently, the concept of sexual harassment
didn’t exist. The story goes as so: in 1974 a teacher, a women named Lin Farley,
was talking to the female students in her class. Per
[wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lin_Farley):

> she began to realize the extent of the problem was later termed “sexual
> harassment”. As the women in the class described their experiences in the
workplace she noticed a pattern: every woman there had either quit or been fired
from a job because they had been made so uncomfortable by the behavior of men.
She discovered that this phenomenon of male harassment and intimidation of
female workers had not been described in the literature and was not publicly
recognized as a problem, although she continued to hear it described by women
from all walks of life.

Philosopher Miranda Fricker explains what went on in this case by saying that
the women lacked the appropriate concepts to make sense of a bit of their
experience, and in particular that bit of their experience relating to how they
were treated by men at work. Lacking the concept, they couldn’t properly make
sense of their experience, and that prevented them from collectively coming
together to speak out against it. They had no reason to think that their
experience was instantiating a pattern that many other women’s experience also
instantiated, and so didn’t say anything, until they were brought together to
speak about it. (Google ‘hermeneutical injustice’ if you want more information
about it.)

When you really think about cases like this, it can be quite overwhelming. Think
about what distinctions we’re currently missing, what things we don’t have words
for and which we consequently don’t understand our world in terms of, what
things we suffer through alone because we don’t realize others are suffering in
the same way. It makes your head spin, and an immediate thought is that we
should try, where at all possible, to furnish our language with the right words.
And so the conceptual engineering project has great possible *social* benefits,
in addition to purely epistemic benefits(this is a point repeatedly made by
Sally Haslanger, one of the big people in the field. She tends to speak of
‘ameliorative projects’ instead of ‘conceptual engineering, in case you want to
google.)

*****

But let’s return to the master argument. Take a word, any word. Almost
inevitably, it could be better than it is. If so, we should change the meaning
of the word so it means the better thing. It will be helpful to have an
interesting example in mind. Andy Clark and David Chalmers famously argue (in
their paper ‘The Extended Mind’) that we should count among the things known not
only those which one can immediately access in one’s brain, but also, for
example, things written down in notebooks or saved on one’s computer. Knowledge,
they argue, is *extended*: it extends beyond the confines of our brains to
comprehend the devices we use to store information. And, they suggest, we
*should* use ‘knowledge’ so that it includes such things, even though they grant
that that’s not how we currently *do* use it.

For example: I don’t know what the last word of the last blog I wrote is. But
according to Clark and Chalmers, I should count as knowing it, because that
information is stored somewhere I can retrieve it easily, and that just makes
for a better concept of knowledge.

#### Is this just ‘quibbling semantics’?

Now, in an era when we outsource so much cognitive work onto google and,
increasingly, digital assistants, this can seem attractive. But also, you might
think, it’s kind of pointless. Clark and Chalmers want to change how we use
‘knowledge’. But who cares who we exactly use this one English word? It’s just,
as the phrase goes, quibbling semantics, and that’s a waste of time. The
question whether we should call googled-knowledge knowledge is a pointless one.
It doesn’t matter — if we think googled-knowledge is interesting, we can just
introduce a new term for it. Arguing about what words exactly mean is for
lawyers (and their clients, and [former
presidents](https://www.quora.com/What-did-Bill-Clinton-mean-when-he-said-it-depends-on-what-the-meaning-of-is-is))
and pedants.

I think this is wrong, and interestingly so, as I’ll now show. Quibbling
semantics is a worthwhile thing to do, because words have power (roughly, what
Cappelen calls ‘lexical effects’). Amazing power. Think about the word
‘knowledge’. You just read it, and doing so caused you to think about a bit of
reality — the knowledgey bit. If I were famous and one million people were
reading this, I would have caused one million people to think about that same
bit of reality. That bit of reality gets a lot of attention by virtue of being
meant by the word ‘knowledge’.

So words have the power to divert attention. And the attention thus diverted can
be productive: it can make people think about the thing, learn about it,
discover things about it. In the case of ‘sexual harassment’ it enabled people
to legislate about it, and otherwise prevent people from harming others.

But — and this is the second important thing — not all words are created equal.
‘Knowledge’ is a very well known and popular word that enables hundreds of
millions of people to coordinate their attention on the same bit of reality.
‘Process reliabilism’, a term from epistemology, is known by max a few thousand.
It’s much less good at getting people to coordinate their attention on the same
bit of reality.

This has important scientific and social consequences. Lawyers, economists,
politicians, journalists and so on all care about and think about and argue
about knowledge. Only philosophers argue about process reliabilism. Some
philosophers think process reliabilism gives a good account of knowledge. If
those philosophers want their findings to be uptaken and built upon, you might
think, it’s imperative that they get the common word ‘knowledge’ to mean
something involving process reliabilism. That is, they should engineer
‘knowledge’ because ‘knowledge’ is a big ticket word, an immensely powerful tool
for coordination, while ‘process reliabilism’ is a relatively weak tool. The
point generalizes: if you want the science of whatever you study to progress,
then you need to get your — correct, you think — views about it out there. And
attaching those views to the word is a great way to do it. But this leads nicely
to the second objection.

#### You can’t just change the meanings of words!

Even if you’re on board with the above, and so think conceptual engineering
might be a useful project, you might nevertheless think that it’s impossible.
Philosophers sometimes speak of the ‘Humpty Dumpty’ theory of meaning after the
following passage from Alice in Wonderland:

> “When I use a word,” Humpty Dumpty said, in rather a scornful tone, “it means
> just what I choose it to mean — neither more nor less.” “The question is,” said
Alice, “whether you *can* make words mean so many different things.”

*Can* Humpty Dumpty, or you, or a famous philosopher make a word mean what
HD/you/FP choose it to mean?

You might think that nobody, especially academics like philosophers, has the
power to change the meanings our words have. Even if it would be good, it’s not
possible. And so conceptual engineering would be a kind of melancholy
undertaking: philosophers would know (or think they know) exactly what words
should mean, and think that this would lead to great social and scientific
benefits … but they can do nothing about it!

I’m not as unoptimistic as some — including Cappelen, the master argument guy —
are about this. Say you’re a professional philosopher who wants to spread the
word about your concept for the social and epistemic benefit of the world. Here
are some things you can do:

* When organizing a conference about your concept, invite one less person, and
use the money that would have been spent on their hotel, travel, and food to pay
a youtube influencer to use the word as you want it to be used.

* Befriend your local judge and try to convince them that the concept of
‘knowledge’ they use is no good, in the hope that they bear that in mind, even
in a small degree, if they’re deciding a case that involves knowledge

* Speak to non-philosophers. Do what people call ‘public philosophy’. Write on
blogs and such and try to spread the word — evangelize about your discovery.

The first two might sound facetious but I’m actually somewhat in earnest. If you
really believe that your concept should be the concept we all use, and in
particular if you think so because the collective attention its use will lead to
will in turn lead to breakthroughs in your field, then it doesn’t seem to me to
outside of the remit of the philosopher to do such things. After all, the goal
of the philosopher is to create knowledge. One way to do that is to write papers
in journals. But another way is to make sure that people at large have the right
conceptual toolkit, the better to enable *them* to create knowledge.

The point generalizes: philosophers who liked the master argument for conceptual
engineering should think about ways to spread engineered words and concepts
about. This is not a worthless or shallow undertaking — it could involve the
close study of history, say the history surrounding sexual harassment, of the
way slang gets propagated on social media, maybe even the — admittedly kind of
debunked — theory of memes that Richard Dawkins liked back in the day.

In any event, I don’t think we should to too pessimistic about the possibility
of changing meaning for the better. ‘Sexual harassment’ is a good example of a
word that got introduced to great benefit; ‘marriage’ a good example of a word
that got changed for socially-beneficial reasons (so as to include gay
marriage); ‘mass’ a good example of a word that got changed for
scientifically-beneficial purposes; and several pejorative words for people with
developmental difficulties which I won’t use are good examples of word that most
people have stopped using. Meaning change happens and so would-be conceptual
engineers — and I’ve argued that could comprise many people — should study it.
