# Will Eleanor (and the others) make it to The Good Place?

Without spoiling too much for those not completely caught up, it seems like
Eleanor and the others are — finally — going to be spending some time in the
good place when they return to TV in the new year.

I’m not sure though: I think it’ll be hard to portray the good place in a
comedy. Here are three reasons for thinking that the gang won’t be living it up
in heaven in 2019.

#### Reason 1: Heaven isn’t funny

Comedy, you might think, arises from out of placeness. A character’s wants are
out of place with their station in life (Homer wants to sleep but he’s doing
jury duty), a joke ends with a word you weren’t expecting (‘I’ve decided to
start taking something for my kleptomania’), [the cat is in a glass but cats
shouldn’t be in glasses](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Mk_t78IeO8). In heaven
there’s no out of placeneness, so heaven isn’t funny, so heaven won’t appear
much in a comedy show.

Here’s a more positive reason for thinking this. One of the sources of comedy in
The Good Place is what it puts in the bad place. Here are a couple taken from
[this list](https://www.newsweek.com/good-place-bad-place-784997)

— The first person to floss in an open-plan office<br>  — The first waiter to
approach a table of diners with an empty plate and sarcastically say, “I guess
you hated it.”

We get the joke: these are kind of annoying things and it’s funny that you would
be forced to suffer a life of eternal damnation on account of them. But here’s a
weird thing: trying to make a similar joke but switching out good place for bad
place doesn’t work. We’d be looking for mildly good things that don’t warrant an
eternity of happiness.

Imagine Michael telling Eleanor the sort of people she can expect to find in the
good place:

— The first person to bring their office mate donuts ‘just because’<br>  — The
first person to politely listen someone recount their dream all the way through

Maybe I’m not funny enough to think of decent examples, but I don’t think
Michael saying these or similar things would make for a funny scene.

Similarly, another source of humour is got by listing very extreme torture
methods in the bad place, like:

— Butthole spiders

— Penis flattener

Can we imagine similarly very extreme nice things in the good place? Would it
work to hear Michael tell Eleanor she can look forward to the below?

— Mountains of puppies

— Infinite ice-cream

I don’t think so. And again, it could be that I’m just bad at thinking of
examples. But it suggests to me that extremely bad things are funny but
extremely good things aren’t. I find that weird, unexpected, and interesting.

(It can be tempting, when thinking about such things, to say to yourself: well
yeah *obviously* there’s this difference between good and bad, and then think
about it no more. The puzzle is *why* it’s obvious.)

<span class="figcaption_hack">Some good and bad things according to The Good Place. Is it just me or are the
bad ones funnier? Except the Houston one, that’s pretty good.</span>

#### Reason 2: ‘The Essence Of Drama Is Conflict’ etc.

You’ve probably heard the above quotation, or perhaps you’ve heard the writing
advice that the most important thing for your story is that your character
*wants* something.

Drama in general, it seems, arises from conflict, want, and in general lacking.
In heaven, you’re not lacking anything, so heaven is hard to portray in stories.

And actually, looking at Western literature arguably you kind of see this. The
most famous work about heaven and hell, Dante’s *Divine Comedy,* spends a lot of
time in heaven watching people get tortured, but kind of jumps the shark when
Dante gets to heaven, and Dante himself gives up on the task of trying to
describe God. The second most famous work, Milton’s *Paradise Lost*, which was
meant to be, in general, pro-God, has instead captivated most readers with its
portrayal of a bad-ass Satan who is much more interesting than the deity. And
given this is a philosophical show, it’s worth pointing out one of the most
famous lines from Jean Paul Sartre’s play *Huis Clos, *‘hell is other people’,
and in particular it’s the everyday squabbles and tensions we have with those
close to us. If that is so, then unless Eleanor and the others are going to stop
squabbling and having tension with each other — unlikely — we won’t see them in
heaven.

It’s arguable, then, that Western literature bears out the claim that heaven is
hard to portray, and so The Good Place writers have an uphill battle ahead of
them.

#### Reason 3: To talk about heaven is preachy or has been done

What would heaven look like in The Good Place? Well, there are two options: it
could be a one-size fits all deal, experienced the same by everyone, or it could
be different for its different residents.

I don’t think it can be a one-size fits all deal. People would complain, and
perhaps with reason. If heaven consisted of nuclear families living normal,
happy lives, those of a more spiritual bent wouldn’t be happy, while if it
consisted of people meditating and praying — ignoring the fact this wouldn’t be
funny — the secular would complain. To take a stance on the good place is to
take a stance on the good life, and that’s too controversial for a sitcom.

But, anyway, you might think, that idea was a non-starter. Judging by the first
episodes of the show — if we can trust them — the good place is particularized
to each resident. So we should expect the actual good place to be like that. The
problem is, in a sense, it’s been done. We’ve already seen this in the first
season and so it wouldn’t be sufficiently interesting to go back to it. I kind
of think in this respect the writers might have painted themselves into a
corner: to be interesting, their heaven can be neither general nor particular,
so it can’t be anything.

