# What language do we speak on social media?

How does the internet change language and how we use it? It might seem little:
after all, I am writing this in standard English and that’s how you are
understanding it. Or it might seem a lot: you are, almost certainly, a stranger
to me, and for most of humanity’s history, most humans have not talked to
strangers in such a way. So you might think what while the *grammar* of language
hasn’t changed, the *uses* to which it’s put have.

My aim here is to explore this thought by introducing some tools from
linguistics and the philosophy of language, and using them to analyse a
particular type of internet language: Twitter English. I will suggest that
looking at this through the linguistic lens we can see good arguments against
the conclusion of the last paragraph: Twitter English, I will suggest, has a
different grammar to standard English. It is a different language.

This is a very important conclusion. If we are, despite ourselves, speaking a
different language in speaking on Twitter (and other such platforms), then we
should care whether we are speaking a good language. And we should be suspicious
that we aren’t: after all, should we expect a language whose structure is
determined by a handful of engineers working on behalf of people looking to
maximise profit is the best language we could be speaking? No, I think, and so
I’ll suggest ways that we could improve Twitter English.

#### A Framework For Thinking About Language

What language is is a big and scary question (most ‘what is x’ questions are).
But we can make things easier by just stipulating that language is what some
linguists study, and then taking a look at the sort of thing they do.

For our purposes, we can understand a language as a bundle of types of
properties, or again as a layers of rules. Consider this sample sentence:

(1) Ume is barking

There are a bunch of things we can say about it. It has syntactic, semantic, and
pragmatic properties (it has other properties, like for example to do with
sound; since I know very little about phonology, the field which studies such
things, and since anyway sound seems less important in the written media of the
internet, I will ignore these properties).

*Syntactically*, we can tell that this sentence is well-formed, in a way that,
for example, and outside of Yoda-English, the following isn’t:

(2) Barking Ume is

More generally, the study of syntax has unearthed a series of rules that govern
when a sentence is well-formed, and specifying these rules is an important part
of describing a language.

Our sentence also has *semantic* properties: it means something. It describes
the current actions of a particular dog. Other sentences mean other things:
‘Rooibos ate kibble’ describes the past actions of a particular cat. Some
sentences mean nothing: ‘Sincerity ate magic’ seems like it’s nonsense. As with
syntax, to give an account of language we need to specify its semantics. This
involves saying what its words mean, but also, more importantly, how the meaning
of complex expressions, like sentences, is determined by the meanings of its
parts and its structure. This fact — that semantics is concerned with the
structure of meaning — will be important later.

Finally, our sentence has *pragmatic* properties: there are facts about how and
why it is used. The pragmatics of our sentence will typically, although not
always, be pretty straightforward (it is used to state a canine-related fact).
But there are more interesting cases.

For example, pragmatics is invoked to explain why, if one is asked how a date
went, and one replies

(3) Well, the starter I ordered was nice

One manages to use that sentence — which just literally means something nice
about food — that convey that the date went badly. For another example,
pragmatics also is used to explain how we can perform actions by saying words.
Speech act theory points out, for example, that when I say

(4) I name you ‘Joey Joe Joe’

I am not reporting on some existing state of affairs: rather, I am bringing it
being the state of affairs of the person’s being called Joey Joe Joe. In saying
those words, I cause a change in the world, a change that makes that currently
unnamed person have a name.

Phonology, syntax, semantics, pragmatics — these we will take as the core
features of a language (although, as said, I won’t say anything more about
phonology). Using these concepts as tools to get a grip on the subject, we can
now ask: what, if anything, is distinctive about social media language? A
surprising amount, it turns out.

#### Twitter English Is Not English

Twitter English, of course, looks like English. It has the same syntax, for the
most part: if we want to report on the actions of our dog, we have to say
something like (1) and can’t say something like (2). And the words on Twitter
seem to mean the same as they do in regular English. Based on that, you might
think it’s the same language.

But that is, I think, not the best way to look at it. One reason for this is
that the basic pragmatics — what one does with the language — are so wildly
different from the pragmatics of English and other natural languages that I
think important facts are occluded by treating Twitter English as standard
English.

Thus think about what we can and cannot do with tweets: we cannot say long
things without threading tweets. That’s a biggie. We cannot, outside of DMs,
address individual people, or small groups, without possibly letting all our
mutual followers see what we’re saying. To speak on twitter is, ipso facto, to
address possibly hundreds of people, possibly most of whom one doesn’t know.
That’s just impossible in normal English. (Try it — say something now, while
reading this. Did you address hundreds of people? If you did, I beseech you,
stop reading this and return to whatever the more important thing it is you’re
doing.).

If we think that the pragmatics are part of the language, then given the wildly
different pragmatics of twitter, we should hold that the language we speak on it
is different from our everyday language.

Hmm, well, maybe. That argument is only at best mildly convincing. But I can do
more: I can show that both the syntax and the semantics of Twitter English are
different from normal English. In order to show that, however, we need to
explore the nature of semantic theory some more.

#### Some Principles of Semantics

Here are two principles:

(P1) The core meaning of an expression is what anyone perceiving a use of that
expression will understand.

(P2) All the core meaning of an expression is syntactically realized.

(Note for people who know about this stuff: I’m going to be making a ton of
simplifying assumptions. I’m pretty confident that if you add in the complexity
the points will still stand, but doing so would make this post unreadable to
normal people, and I want normal people to read it.)

Let me illustrate these two principles: imagine you’re walking quickly through a
mall. You hear a man say ‘I want that coat!’, walk some more, and hear another
man, outside another store, also say ‘I want that coat!’ There’s a good sense in
which these speakers say different things: the former, let’s say that his name
is Joey Joe Joe, and let’s say he’s standing outside a Gap, says something
that’s true provided Joey Joe Joe wants Gap’s New Spring Parka. The latter —
Shabadoo Junior — is standing outside an Urban Outfitters, and says that
Shabadoo Junior wants Urban Outfitter’s Best Pressed Denim Jacket.

Although both speakers say different thing, nevertheless there’s something like
a shared meaning graspable by me: that the person speaking wants some coat that
they can currently perceive and which has their attention (roughly). Call that
*core meaning*: the thing that anyone hearing an expression understands (for
cognoscenti: this sounds like Kaplanian character, but that isn’t quite what I
mean, as will become apparent).

To see the second principle, change the example to ‘I want *the* coat!’ Again
plausibly, the first is saying something like that he wants the coat *in the
window of the Gap*, while the second is saying something like that he wants the
coat *in the window of the Urban Outfitters*. However, it’s plausible — although
philosophers, being the sort of people they are have tried to deny it — that in
each case, they said, syntactically speaking, the same sentence. And since we’ve
agreed that they’ve also both expressed the same core meaning, it seems
plausible to say that all and only core meaning is syntactically realized. On
this story, ‘in the window of the Gap’ and ‘in the window of the Urban
Outfitters’, aren’t core meaning, and so aren’t part of the syntax of the
sentence.

I admit, to properly defend these principles would take a lot of work; I won’t
do it here. You’ll just have to trust me.

Now note the following crucially important fact:

(*) Anyone perceiving a tweet involves perceiving facts about its reception

So, by P1

(*) Facts about its reception are part of its core meaning

And, by P2

(*) Facts about its reception are syntactically realized

The reason for the first thing is just because those facts — the number of
replies, retweets, and favourites — are part of the tweet object that is
displayed on the timeline. To see a tweet is to see those things, and so by the
independently plausible principles they are part of its core meaning and thus
the syntax:

<span class="figcaption_hack">A tweet as it appears on one’s timeline: note that information about its
reception — its retweets and likes — is automatically included</span>

And this makes, I think, independent sense: we say that the unit of
significance, on twitter, is not the (normal) English sentence embedded in it,
but rather the whole thing. The syntax of a tweet, then, consists of an English
kernel along with metadata and reception information. We could represent it as
so: S,[g],[p],DT,R,RT,F, where the bracketed things (g=gif, p=picture) are
optional, DT=date time, R=replies, and so on.

#### Embedding Arguments

Here’s another argument for the claim that reception information is part of the
core meaning of a tweet. In the theory of meaning, semantics, a very important
type of argument is *embedding arguments*. In an embedding argument, you test
your analysis of a bit of language by embedding that bit of language in a more
complicated linguistic environment and making sure that your analysis still
holds up.

In particular, here is an important principle:

(P3) The core meaning of an expression is preserved when embedded

Many of the most famous arguments in semantics make use of something like this
principle. To see it in action, consider definite descriptions, expressions like
‘the president’.

Here’s an initially plausible analysis of definite descriptions: they simply
serve to stand for the thing that they describe. The core meaning of ‘the
president’, then, would simply be Trump.

An embedding argument shows that that can’t be right, because that purported
core meaning isn’t preserved when ‘the president’ is embedded in certain
environments. Thus consider:

(5) In 1934, the president was a democrat

This sentence doesn’t, on its most plausible reading, say that Trump was a
democrat in 1934 — he didn’t exist then. Rather, it says that the president *at
that time* was a democrat. But if Trump himself is the core meaning, and core
meaning is preserved, it should say that in 1934 he was a democrat. Since it
doesn’t, we can conclude that the core meaning of ‘the president’ is not Trump.

Here’s one other example. Some people think that only fact-stating language is
really meaningful. Talk about God, aesthetics, morality, and other purported
non-empirical stuff is not in the business of talking about the world. Rather,
when you say something like

(6) Murder is wrong

You’re expressing your attitude towards murder. It’s like, people say, you were
saying ‘Boo, murder!’ You’re not really saying something, anymore than you’re
saying something when you boo a sports team, or say ouch, or scream, or laugh.
(6) has no core meaning.

Again, though, an embedding argument causes problems. If that sentence has no
meaning, then any sentence of which it is part should also have no meaning. If
core meaning, and only core meaning, is preserved in embedding, and there is no
core meaning, then nothing is preserved, and embeddings should be meaningless.

But they aren’t. Embedding our sentence in an if-then environment yields a
perfectly meaningful sentence:

(7) If murder is wrong, then murderers should be imprisoned.

(By contrast, ‘if Boo murder!, murderers should be imprisoned’ truly is
meaningless.)

Examples like this could be multiplied. The point is: embedding arguments are a
very good way to learn about the core meaning of an expression.

Now here’s a claim: retweets are embeddings. Just as I embed ‘the president was
a democrat’ under ‘In 1934’, so I embed a tweet by clicking retweet, which we
could imagine is as if I said ‘I retweet’ (remember back in the day retweets
were explicitly marked by ‘RT’ in the tweet body — they were clearly embeddings
back then).

But note, retweets preserve information about other retweets, favourites, and
replies. By our principle, then, information about retweets, favourites, and
replies is part of the core meaning of a tweet.


And here is yet a third piece of evidence: increasingly people, when writing
pretend tweets of their own for comedic purposes, explicitly write in reception
information. I couldn’t find any examples quickly, unfortunately — if I do, I’ll
add one later.

(Note, incidentally, that the methodology I have pursued here: a combination of
looking at how people actually use language on Twitter as well as invoking
theoretical tools, is a good illustration of how working semanticists actually
provide analyses of bits of language. Although it might seem like an unserious
object of study, in studying twitter English one is doing proper linguistic
analysis.)

#### So what?

I have belaboured this point but only because I think it is monumentally
significant in several respects. Our pretheoretic understanding of language is
that someone says something, others evaluate it, but the evaluation and what is
said are different. If you buy my argument, then this isn’t so for Twitter
English: facts about a tweet’s reception are part of its meaning. This is a
massive change.

(Skippable technical aside: in fact, recent work in philosophy of language and
linguistics has room for reception in the theory of meaning. Properly to explain
this would be a bit difficult, but consider a sentence like:

(8) Kefir is delicious

I think kefir is delicious, and so am wont to utter this sentence. Others
disagree: they might hear me say that sentence and refuse to assent to it. Here
is what some take to be compelling: we have a case of faultless disagreement.
It’s disagreement: there is some one claim we’re disputing. But it’s faultless:
neither of us is really wrong. You have your tastes, I have mine, and neither is
correct. One way to make sense of this is to say that our sentence isn’t true
once and for all, but can be variably true or false relative to different
audiences. Truth is relative.

To find out whether a sentence like this is true, it’s not enough to look out
into the world and see how things stand. Rather, you have to also look to a
particular person and their particular taste: if, according to their taste,
kefir is delicious, then the sentence is true relative to them; if not, not.

It’s thought that this can explain faultless disagreement: there is some object
of disagreement, namely whether kefir is delicious, but the way we evaluate it
for truth or falsity is different to the way we evaluate ‘Ume is barking’ for
truth and falsity. And the big picture point is that this way of evaluation
seems to bring in something like reception: in how the audience, and in
particular the audience’s taste, is. This is known as relativism about truth,
and I apologise to any philosophers of language having conniptions about the
imprecision in the above.)

Returning to the main line of argument: it’s a big change to introduce facts
about reception into the meaning of an expression. And it’s a fact we should be
worried about. Because, after all, we don’t get to decide whether to convey
reception information as part of the meaning of what we say. It’s an automatic
feature of the Twitter software, software designed by engineers at the bidding
of executives a central motive of whom is to extract profit from our activities.

It’s pretty widely acknowledged that by communicating on social media we are
enriching the tech companies who own the platform. My argument takes this a step
further: not only do our actions benefit them, but *the very things we say* are
out of our control and determined by those companies. We are alienated from what
we can mean by the platforms by which we communicate on the internet.

It’s worth thinking a bit about exactly what the intruded core meaning of tweets
are. If it’s notable that they include reception information, it’s also notable
what they don’t contain. For example, they don’t contain details about how big
the original audience was, but that is surely important since a tweet seen by
hundreds of thousands of people originally that gets a couple of hundred
retweets is much less noteworthy than one that originally was seen only by a
small audience. Arguably, it would be better were that information part of the
core meaning of the tweet.

But that suggests a thought: let’s grant that platforms determine what we mean.
Then a question we can ask is: what sort of institutions would enable us to mean
better things. Granted that Twitter English is inferior in certain ways, what
would a superior internet language look like?

#### Making Internet Language Better

A venerable philosophical and scientific idea has it that our languages can and
should be improved. In the 19th century, a flurry of work arose with people
trying to design universal languages, of which Esperanto and Volapük were two of
the earliest and most famous. Around the same time, the German
philosopher/logician Gottlob Frege developed his *Begriffsschrift*, the goal of
which was to make a language that didn’t suffer from the defects of vagueness
that afflict natural language. And yet more recently, philosophers interesting
in conceptual engineering have noted that it’s almost certainly wrong that our
language is as good as it could be, and given this fact, we should try to
engineer our language to make it better.

So let’s ask: what would a good internet language look like? I am interested in
hearing others’ views on this, but here are some initial thoughts:

It would be good if there were ways to indicate one’s confidence in a given
claim. Arguably, we seldom outright believe things: we rather think it’s
probable, likely, very likely, almost certain, etc. In real life, but especially
in an environment where characters count, these important qualifications might
tend to fall out, and we can wander into making stronger claims than we in fact
hold. This is bad.

But if we realize that meaning is determined by the interface, then we can
design the interface to make it automatic that such information is included. We
could include a confidence bar, for example, where you indicate how strong your
confidence is in the thing you’re saying, which would automatically show up as
part of the tweet. Arguably this could be very beneficial.

Here’s another example. There is more or less no limits to how much you can
tweet. And this is reflective of a fact about real world speech, namely that the
amount you can speak is limited only by your physical capacities. No one has the
right to limit how much you speak, because speaking is a bodily action over
which you have control.

But maybe that’s bad. Maybe we should prefer a language the pragmatics of which
excluded people from talking constantly: maybe that would lead such people to
prioritize what they say, increasing the overall quality of discourse.

And that is something that could easily be implemented in twitter English (while
impossible to implement in normal English). A timer could be introduced such
that you could only tweet so many times in a given period. It’s an open question
whether that would make language better, but it is something worth exploring.

These are merely illustrations. The important point is to realize that we could
make better platforms, and that could help us communicate better.

*****

The language of social media is a new sort of language. This is monumentally
important, and both worrisome and hope-inspiring. It is worrisome because what
we say is determined in part by the structure of the platforms we use, and we
don’t have good reason to trust that the designers and owners of those platforms
are concerned with letting us communicate in the best way possible.

But it’s hope-inspiring because, recognising this, we recognise the possibility
of designing platforms, and thus ways of communicating, that our better than we
currently have. The goal of the constructed languages of the 19th century was to
foster world peace by eliminating language barriers, and although that didn’t go
so well, the prospect of improving how we live by improving how we speak is one
that we should still look on with excitement.


