# Why Do Millennials Drink Less and Have Less Sex?

You’ve probably read the results of some studies according to which millennials
[drink
less](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/oct/11/young-people-drunk-acohol-millenials)
and [have less
sex](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2018/12/the-sex-recession/573949/)
than their Generation X or Boomer forebears. And if you have, you’ve probably
heard the theory that at least a portion of the blame for this can be attributed
to the rise of smartphones.

While I think must be part of the story, it also seems to me that commentators
haven’t realized millennials’ habits are reflective of a broad trend in post-WW2
social behaviour, a trend that sees face-to-face activity replaced by staring at
a screen. A very famous work of sociology, Robert Putnam’s 2000 *Bowling Alone,
*showed that humans in the last third of the 20th century got less connected and
more atomized. They stopped getting involved in neighborhood watch groups or
PTAs or, indeed, bowling leagues. And this atomization correlates neatly, Putnam
shows, with the rapid rise of television in American homes and day to day lives.

Considering this suggests a unified theory of the last fifty of so years:
screens, of televisions or smartphones, by offering proxies for face-to-face
socializing, replaced the latter.

It’s useful to see this for three reasons. For one, it helps to realize that
there’s not something world-shatteringly new and weird about millennials. They
are not some unique generation whose ways are determined by the fact that they
happened to grow up as the iPhone came out, a cohort to be pitied or mocked by
their hard drinking, sex-having elders.

Rather, they are simply following a path that those elders already started
walking, one replacing people for screens. Secondly, the decline of sex and
drinking correlates with an increase in mental health problems among
millennials. If we think smartphones are the cause of the former, we might think
that they are also the cause of the latter, and accordingly that stopping using
smartphones would help with millennials’ mental health problems. But if instead
we are seeing the playing out of a more general pattern linking technology with
sociality, then we have to make sure we don’t replace smartphones with equally
harmful technologies. It’s not enough to ditch the smartphone if we replace it
with binge watching Netflix, a point we can only appreciate by looking back a
few decades. Thirdly, if we understand millennials in terms of broad historical
trends, we might be able better to foresee how things will play out, and be
better placed to deal with the future. If there is indeed a pattern of better
technology increasingly replacing face-to-face interaction, we should be very
worried about AI, sex robots, and so on further etiolating our connectedness to
each other.

#### The Issue

I’m going to be relying on
[this](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2018/12/the-sex-recession/573949/)
very long and interesting article from The Atlantic — every piece of data in the
following paragraph is got from that piece (it itself to a large extent reports
on Jean M. Twenge’s book *iGen*).

Millennials are having less sex, both in the US and elsewhere. Research by
Twenge points out that people in their early 20s are considerably more likely to
be abstinent than their Gen X counterparts at that age; 15% hadn’t had sex since
adulthood. Importantly, this isn’t restricted to the United States. The UK also
records these things and young people have been having less sex there. Ditto
Finland. Ditto the Netherlands. Ditto Sweden.

Abstinence and restraint also seem to apply to alcohol. From [this
article](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/oct/11/young-people-drunk-acohol-millenials),
I learn that as of 2015, 1/3 of British teens aged 16–24 don’t drink; in 2005,
it was 1/5. Similar data exist for the US
([here](https://www.post-gazette.com/news/health/2018/08/07/New-study-shows-millennials-drinking-less-pennsylvania/stories/201808060166))).
I couldn’t find interesting figures for continental Europe, but a [sliver of
evidence](https://nordic.businessinsider.com/young-danes-hold-the-european-record-for-drinking--but-a-new-law-could-put-an-end-to-that-2017-4/)
suggests that there is no particularly clear pattern — notably, there doesn’t
appear to be any sharp difference, either concerning sex or alcohol, between the
more affluent north and the more economically troubled south of Europe.

#### The Internet To Blame?

Proposed explanations of these facts aren’t lacking. The Atlantic article
suggests several for the decline in sex, including porn, online dating, and
hookup culture. And some have suggested that millennials are drinking less
simply because they know that it’s bad for them.

One of the most popular explanations comes from Twenge, who correlates the
decline of both drinking and sex with the advent of the smartphone in 2007.
Around then, according to her work, two things happen: people come to spend much
less time with each other, as opposed to with their devices, and mental health
among young people starts to get worse.

Twenge’s work has received much attention, and it is intuitively compelling. If
drinking and sex are primarily activities one can’t do alone, and using
smartphones are paradigmatically solitary activities, then the rise of the
latter, given the finite numbers of hours in the day, may well easily eat into
the latter. This is especially pressing given the fact that the internet offers
things *like* face-to-face connection: social media is a low-stress way of
interacting with people, looking at porn a low-stress way of satisfying sexual
desire.


#### Zooming Out

Is it, then, the internet that is responsible for millennials’ habits? I think
that zooming out a bit suggests that while it is part of the answer, there is
more to be said. The internet and its effects are simply the latest chapter of a
piece of our recent history, one of the main features of which has been a rise
of screens and a decline of face-to-face activities.

In order to see this, it helps to go back a bit, and consider other technologies
and the effects *they* had on face-to-face activities. If we see similar things,
then we have reason to conclude that it’s not necessarily the case that
millennials should put down their smartphones — at least, if they do put them
down, they should make sure not to replace them with equally harmful
technologies.

So let’s zoom out and consider Putnam’s book, mentioned above. It is about
social connectedness and civic participation in the last third of the 20th
century. Civic participation takes many different forms, for example voting,
running for office, PTAs or neighborhood watch programs, workers’ unions and
other professional organisations, playing or watching sports, volunteering or
other charity work, or simply hanging out at a bar with friends. Civic
participation is very important: such associations not only strengthen
communities, but they lead to friendship. Moreover, they are very important for
well-being. The more connected we are, the less likely we are to experience
‘colds, heart attacks, strokes, cancer, depression, and premature death of all
sorts’ (*Bowling Alone*, 327). These are well-established findings —
‘statistically speaking, the evidence for the health consequences of social
connectedness is as strong today was was the evidence for the health
consequences of smoking at the time of the first surgeon’s general report on
smoking’ (same page).

So what’s been happening with civic participation, then? Alas, not good things.
Putnam books meticulously details how, since around the 1960s, rates of
participation have been plummeting. People vote less, form less community
groups, play sports together less, even hang out in bars less.

And Putnam provides a possible reason for this: television. After the war,
television very quickly came to be ubiquitous in people’s homes. I refer the
reader to Putnam’s book for all the details, but one suggestive piece of
information is that in 1950, around 10% of homes had TVs, while in 1959, 90% did
(page 221).

In Putnam’s words:

> in a correlational sense….more television watching means less of virtually every
> form of civic participation and social involvement…dependence on television for
entertainment is not merely a significant predictor of civic disengagement. It
is the *single most consistent predictor* that I have discovered (228…231).

This is striking. Way before the internet, we see the case made that a
screen-based technology isolates us, diminishing social behaviour. Given this,
we should be very careful analyzing millennials in case we miss out on larger
trends that better explain their behaviour.

This is the explanation I think follows: civic participation and drinking and
sex are stopping points along the same continuum, as two different forms of
face-to-face activity, and we should seek to understand their declines in terms
of the same underlying mechanism.

Civic participation, you might think, is a more optional or peripheral form of
social activity. It is what you do with people who you otherwise have less
reason to spend time with, and without which you can still lead a full and rich
life.

By contrast, sex, with partners, and drinking, arguably a paradigm behaviour for
groups of friends, are more central forms of social activity, since for most
people, relationships with partners and friends are some of the most valuable
things in life.

What we see, then, looking back, is a pattern stretching back to mid last
century, as gradually we become less and less connected. At first we jettison
the more peripheral aspects of socialization, but then technology gets better
and we stop doing the more fundamental things.

*****

I think this perspective should both hearten and worry us. It should hearten us:
there is nothing completely novel and weird about millennials as compared with
the previous generations. We are all following the same path of switching out
people for technology; it’s just the technology that changes. Realizing this,
especially when we note, with both Twenge and Putnam, the correlation between
face-to-face interactions and good health, we have a path forward: get rid of
screens of all sorts!

But it’s also worrying, because, well, *will* we get rid of technology? Things
don’t seem to be going that way. If what we have witnessed since around 1960 is
more and more social activity eaten into by better technology, we should be
worried about the possibility of yet better technology — sex robots immediately
spring to mind — and yet further etiolated social lives.

