# Radical Publishing: A Proposal

The aim of this post is to present a way of producing and consuming literature,
one radically different to the prevailing and flawed model. It’s roughly
inspired by the radical markets movement and theory I talked about in [this
post](https://medium.com/@mittmattmutt/radical-markets-and-generalized-capitalist-realism-16213b71ed8),
and one which I think could dramatically improve the experience of both readers
and writers, both in terms of fairness and quality. First I’ll present the
prevailing model, then sketch my alternative, then flesh it out by considering
some objections.

#### The Traditional Model

It helps to understand how literature is produced and consumed by considering a
simple model of it. Call the *traditional model* the following. At heart, there
is a set of *authors *who produce what they take to be good *novels*. A novel
takes a long time to make and costs, comparatively, a large amount. There is a
set of *readers* who buy what they take to be good novels. Some people agree
about what makes a novel good, but there is great disagreement and no consensus.

In between readers and writers, there are the people who determine what to
publish, physically produce it, and promote it. Call these people *filterers*,
because their main purpose is to act as a filter which stops bad work and lets
through the good work deserving of our attention. Literary agents, who deal with
publishers on behalf of authors, editors at publishers, reviewers, editors of
book pages in literary magazines, owners and deciders of various literary prizes
are all filterers.

The current system doesn’t work well for many. The vast majority of authors,
many of whom have dedicated years to their craft, never make it through the
filtering stage, and remain unpublished and unknown. And my suspicion is that
many readers are not well-served by the filtering process in the sense that it
doesn’t yield reliable recommendations about what books are good. I at least
used to buy the books praised by the filtering system to discard them after 50
pages. And I find books I love almost always by recommendations from people who
know literature, or even purely by accident. The most astounding book I read in
2017, Michael Muhammed Knight’s *Impossible Man*, I found because I was reading
in a quiet section of a library and the book *beside it* had a shiny cover that
made me go look. I so easily could have been deprived that great reading
experience, and that makes me think about how many great reading experiences I
and others are deprived of by inadequate filtering. We should fix that.

Moreover, the filtering stage is often seen to be inept and/or corrupt.
Publishers (thus agents) are apparently very poor at predicting when a book will
do well, but since that’s pretty much their whole job, that isn’t great.
Reviewers often review their friends gushingly (see the UK satirical magazine
*Private Eye*’s recurring section ‘log rolling’ which details this); and prizes
are often functions of money and promotion (looking at you, Man Booker Prize).

(A diagram would be nice here. I lack the skills to draw a nice one, so imagine:
on the left of the page, a swarm of dots of many colours, the authors. Colours
represent taste/perspective. Lines connect elements of the swarm to a
homogeneous grey blob in the centre of the page, the filterers. The grey blob is
then connected by lines to another swam of coloured dots on the right, the
readers. While this is a bit of a tendentious use of colouring, where’s the rule
that says imaginary diagrams can’t be tendentiously coloured?)

Note that the traditional model is arguably not all bad. It makes sense under
the assumptions of a relatively small number of writers and a relatively
homogeneous-in-taste set of readers. In such a case, provided the filterers’
tastes coincided with the tastes of the readers, good results would follow.
Arguably, this would have been so 100 years ago and perhaps sooner, when in
particular access to intellectual life was much more restricted. If primarily
white middle-class men were writing for white middle-class men readers, then
white middle-class men filterers wouldn't cause too much damage.

But things have changed. Increased access to in particular tertiary education
which, at least in the humanities, teaches one, if nothing else, how to
regularly put decentish number of words to paper has meant that being a writer
is something which many now can quasi-reasonably aspire to. For at least the
same reason, readers have got more diverse. Moreover, technology has changed:
thanks to e-readers and print on demand, publishers qua people who actually
produce a book are no longer needed. Thanks to technology to monitor and pay for
microactivities — reading a page and automatically paying for it, say — we need
no longer be shackled to the book — expensive to create, buy, and read — as the
unit of literary production, and can instead hone in on the chapter or the page,
so that the unit of literature more closely reflects how we consume it (a page
at a time, preferably with an option to stop reading if we get bored).

That circumstances have changed suggests to me that our model should change.
Given we have many more writers, we should try to put as much of their talent to
use. Given we have many more readers occupying different perspectives, we should
try to find a way to connect them to works they, they in particular, will
actually like.

#### An Alternative

Here is my suggestion for what an updated model could look like: firstly, more
writers would be involved, and we would do that by making mainstream the process
of — perhaps massive — coauthorship of literature. Coauthorship works very well
for television; if you balk at the suggestion that literature should be
coauthored (as you might — would one really want to tell Beckett, Dickinson,
Kafka, that they should have coauthored?), I reply that you need to broaden your
horizons. Literature has no essence, and I’m not suggesting that single
authorship cease; we should just make literature *more*, by expanding its scope
to better use the talent available to us. Nevertheless this is a solid objection
that I respond to in more detail more.

Secondly, much of the apparatus of the filtering stage — agents, publishers, and
reviewers — would cease to exist, and be replaced with a way of connecting
writers and readers that works: that hooks up readers with books they will love.
Basically we introduce a *recommendation market*: we take the money used for
filterers and pay individuals (which crucially and plausibly will contain
underemployed writers) who successfully connect readers to books they love,
using a standard knowledge-revealing market mechanism, and, crucially, bringing
people en masse into the process of disseminating and recommending literature,
rather than it just falling to a few elite reviewers, agents, etc. Think of it
as a peer-to-peer model connecting writers and readers, with only a sliver of a
middle man in the recommender, whose work we can rely on because it is paid (in
imaginary diagram terms: the middle grey blob is replaced by another coloured
swarm, into which and out of which the lines come.)

Thirdly, we take advantage of technology and introduce a pay-by-page model. You
only read what you pay for so that payment is proportional to the time spent
reading (in the current model, if you buy a book and give up after 50 pages, you
don’t get a refund.) This model is much fairer, and will enable readers to try
out many more writers until they find one they like, and will thereby increase
the number of writers being read.

I think this is a really interesting model, one which promises to make things
both better and fairer for readers and writers alike. I take it that points two
and three, while novel, are understandably so. Hopefully you can see the logic
and why such things might be desirable. In this brief post, I won’t say any more
about them. However, the first point, about coauthorship, might seem very
undesirable, and so I will spent some time defending the idea. I should say,
though, this post is really a first word, a beginning tentative look at an
underexplored region of logical space, and — hopefully obviously — not final
thoughts.

(A note: while I’m calling for the abolition of filterers, filterers shouldn’t
be that worried. I myself am a filterer (albeit in academia) and the important
thing to realize is that while I propose to eliminate jobs, I also propose to
create new jobs which could be occupied by the current filterers. My aim is to
get rid of the poorly designed institutions of filtering; the talents filterers
have will still be needed. Also, let me take this parenthesis to shout out the
people who are already doing good work in this area. I think in particular of
indie publishers [Dostoyevsky Wannabe](https://www.dostoyevskywannabe.com/) who
by dint of talent and clever use of technology punch much above their weight and
deserve a lot of admiration.)

#### Potential Problems For Collective Authorship

Collective authorship has at least the following advantages: it would give
people whose work is now completely ignored the chance to make some contribution
to works people read. Many more voices will be heard (albeit, heard for less
long than if they managed to get a novel released), which I think is inherently
good. And people could begin to make reputations for themselves by amassing
small contributions. The more fine-grained feedback mechanisms technology gives
us (such as, for example, seeing how many people lingered over a paragraph or
highlighted it) could, moreover, enable such writers to see the effect their
work is having on people.

Less substantially but almost as importantly, it would foster a spirit of
collaboration rather than the current model, which promotes competition between
each other, vying for position, kissing the ass of filterers and successful
people, and so on. A model of literature on which others’ success is in part
your success — on which you can whole-heartedly enjoy another’s contribution
because you’re contributing to the same thing — is also, I think, inherently
desirable.

Finally, and potentially most importantly, but most uncertainly, it could
dramatically improve literature itself. If something like a wisdom of crowds
phenomenon holds for literature, then we could see new works, much more varied
and wide-ranging than any one person could manage. New mega-works of a quality
we can barely yet comprehend. That’s an exciting possibility.

When you combine this with my idea of having people act as paid recommenders — a
job writers would be very well suited to — the proposal offered here should seem
attractive to many writers. But one might also have some worries about it. I
address a couple below, taking the opportunity to flesh the view out a bit more
while doing so.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*gQBuiO5Mvh03IY7OZ6s0Qw.jpeg)
<span class="figcaption_hack">One might worry that collaborative writing will lead to undistinctive work, as
superimposing photos of faces leads to blurry indistinct faces. This isn’t so,
though.</span>

#### Bad For Literature?

Let me focus on the objection I raised above: that coauthorship is inimical to
literature. Literature, one might think, is the expression of one’s very
particular perspective on the world; any attempt to combine perspectives will
lead, like Galton’s composite photographs, to unsharp blurry distortions. Again,
think of the greats of literature. We like Beckett because his world is so
different (and yet so familiar) to ours: so weird, so particular, yet
understandable. If we were to miss out on voices like that, that would be very
bad.

More generally, we have this idea that creativity doesn’t work with groups.
(What is that saying? A zebra is a horse concocted by a focus group? I genuinely
can’t remember and google isn’t helping. It’s some witticism about how focus
groups brainstorming lead to silly things. If you know the quotation I’m
thinking about let me know.) And you, as a writer, let’s say, may look on the
proposal with horror: you want to tell *your* story. The thought of letting
anyone else partly tell it is deeply unattractive (mentioning this idea to a
couple of other writers, this was the response I got).

I realize the force of these considerations but ultimately I don’t think they
work. The basic reason for this is that I’m not suggesting that all literature
be cowritten. I’m suggesting we *expand* our conception of literature so as to
countenance in addition to singly written works coauthored works as mainstream
productions. (I’m aware that coauthorship at present exists (such as the Wu Ming
collective). As far as I know, however, it’s somewhat fringe).

We know that coauthorship works in other disciplines. Speaking personally, some
of the art I hold most dear — The Simpsons and Seinfeld, for example — are
coauthored. Moreover, and interestingly, these show that coauthorship doesn’t
even imply the dulling of a distinctive narrative voice. You can tell a John
Swartzwelder episode of The Simpsons, or a Larry David Seinfeld (at least, if
you’re a massive nerd like me who has watched each episode upwards of ten times)
very quickly. It has a distinct feel and vibe, and yet — as far as I know — it,
like every other episode, would have been subject to rewrites by a room full of
writers. This suggests for the cynic a possible way to start exploring this
idea: look at how writers’ rooms work, and try to make, so to speak, prestige
literature, a sort of group-written literature explicitly modelled on prestige
TV (if you’re snobby about TV, you probably won’t like this whole idea; fair
enough, you should probably stop reading.)

But even more basically, I have to accept that maybe it won’t work. Maybe for
some weird reason coauthored literature doesn’t work. The thing to do, I think,
is try it out under the right circumstances and see. It would be an experiment,
but one with a great possible upside — promise to use much of the unused
creative labour in the writing community — and so an experiment worth carrying
out.

#### Bad For Writers?

But, wait, you might think. Would this really be good for writers? If a
motivation for writing is simply to put one’s perspective out on the world and
be recognized for it, you might not be happy contributing a few pages or plot
ideas, nor content with your name just being one among many. You want fame!

A couple of responses: we can’t all be famous. Under the normal model,
statistically speaking you’re likely to make no contribution to the art of the
world, and thus to receive no recognition. The alternative I’m proposing is that
you could instead to try to make a small contribution and receive a small
recognition. Whether you try that is entirely up to you: to repeat, you’ll still
be free to single-author things. It’s just a question of working out what your
values are. A small shot at big fame or a decent shot at small fame. I’m adding
to, not removing from, artistic possibilities.

And anyway, secondly, it’s not the case that being part of a writing team
condemns one to obscurity. Comedy nerds follow the careers of our famous
writers. We watch The Good Place because Megan Amram writes for it, and she was
one of the main voices on Parks and Rec. Conan O’Brien got his start as a
Simpsons writer. Examples could be multiplied. While these are exceptions and
most TV writers aren’t so famous, equally most people who write aren’t as famous
as the people you read about in newspaper book sections.

#### Bad for readers?

But … what is the goal of collectively written fiction? The goal of single
author fiction is, you might think, to give voice to your perspective. In the
absence of a single voice, is there not a risk that this idea will produce
cookie-cutter mass produced fiction? That, in trying thus to satisfy everyone,
you will satisfy no one?

Let me answer these questions in turn. First, the goal: I can remain agnostic
about that. The goal of collectively written fiction is the same as the goal of
The Simpsons writers: good art, whatever that means.

(Not being agnostic opens up some interesting possibilities given the framework
I’ve posited. If we’re adopting a micro-work micro-payment model, where authors
just pay for what they read, then we could fine-grain the concept of good
fiction in terms of what keeps readers reading. We could even do things like A/B
test different plot points. But I won’t elaborate on these very suggestive ideas
here.)

As to the cookie-cutter point. There’s no logical reason why a plurality of
voices implies blandness. At the risk of repetition: The Simpsons. More
generally, we can use data to build up fine-grained target audiences. And we can
then have a collective attempt to write, say, for the lovers of postmodern
American avantgarde fiction. Such a collective, presumably, will consist in
postmodern American avantgarde fiction writers producing postmodern American
avantgarde fiction. The point is, blandness only follows if you treat the
audience as a homogeneous entity: one size fits all. But that isn’t the
suggestion, which is that we divide the audience up into many different
audiences with different tastes which we can then target.

There’s more to say. I encourage you to think of objections I haven’t considered
or benefits I haven’t mentioned. It’s a massively unexplored region of logical
space that we should try to explore.

*****

Let’s say you like some of these ideas. You might think nevertheless they are
unimplementable. One important thing to note is that plausibly there are people
out there who would benefit from it, and who thus might be willing to try it
(all you need to assume is that you can map every published writer of a given
talent level to an unpublished writer of the same talent level (very plausible)
and every reader well served by the traditional filtering model to one poorly
served (again, pretty plausible, I think), and that there are a range of people
who would, in exchange for money, try to connect readers and writers (again,
pretty plausible), and you have the numbers). Implementing such large scale
institutional changes are difficult, I grant, but that doesn’t mean we shouldn’t
try.

Society has changed but the institutions of literature haven’t changed with it.
They should change. I have begun here to suggest a way they could change. Even
if you don’t like my particular suggestions, I hope you see the value and indeed
the necessity of this project.


